We Begin tonight with Tan's response to
a suspected Israeli air strike on Iran
both more muted and restrained than the
world expected Iranian officials say
that air defenses were activated at a
military base and nuclear facility near
the Central City of Isfahan us officials
say Israel fired at least one missile in
retaliation for an extensive Iranian
rocket and drone attack last weekend
flashes Mark the sky above Iran and
what's alleged to be an Israeli
attack Iran State media reported loud
sounds being heard near the city of
Isfahan the area is home to important
defense facilities and a large nuclear
Center the attack prompted flight
diversions across
Iran by Daybreak the incident was being
downplay
play the state media reporting the city
was calm and emphasizing that nothing
was out of the ordinary there were some
uh loud sounds that were heard in the
east of the city of esvan and this was
related to the air defense system as uh
we told you and our viewers before uh
triggered by the presence of uh three
small drones that were present in that
area
other than that nothing has happened
everything is back to
normal us officials have reportedly told
media that Israel is behind the incident
its War cabinet has been debating its
response to a largescale Iranian missile
attack last
weekend Iran said it had retaliated to a
presumed Israeli strike on Iran's
Embassy in Syria which killed 13
People Israel hasn't acknowledged the is
foran attack but its national security
minister indicated he thought it didn't
go far enough posting the word feeble on
social media Oman condemned the
suspected strike while Egypt urged
restraint from all parties the EU and
other Regional leaders are also calling
for
calm we have to do all everything
possible that all sides restrain from
the escalation in that region um we have
seen the massive attack with drones and
missiles round about 300 uh by Iran on
Israel um it is absolutely necessary
that the region stays stable and that
all sides refrain from further
action a ple for Israel and Iran to
deescalate in hopes of keeping this
latest Middle East violence from
spiraling out of
control all we've had team coverage of
this story tonight I'm joined Now by our
correspondent Tanya Kramer in Jerusalem
and Benjamin Alvarez Gruber in
Washington DC Tanya let me start with
you what are Israeli officials what are
they saying about these reported
strikes well we haven't heard any
comment officially at least from uh the
Israeli government or the military we
reached out to them early in the morning
to the military um and uh basically what
we know is mainly from uh Iranian State
media but also from uh reports in the US
media quoting us officials that indicate
that Israel had indeed carried out this
strike now what's discussed here in
Israel that is if this appears to be an
Israeli strike it needed uh to uh carry
it out uh for its deterrence after the
uh large Counterattack by Iran which was
in itself a reprisal to the uh alleged
uh Israeli attack on the consulate uh
compound in Damascus on April uh 1st now
it appears to be uh uh Limited in scope
and there more and more details of
course coming out we don't know you know
what more about the target we don't know
more about the scope but this is also
seen to keep it wag at the moment to
deescalate and already escalated uh
situation and we also hearing from
Iranian sources that they might look the
other way saying there is no need for an
immediate retaliation and something like
that could also be uh you know seen in
in this from the Israeli side yeah yeah
muted to say the least Benjamin what are
we hearing of anything from us officials
about what happened
overnight what tan just mentioned there
that us officials said that the US was
informed before this attack is something
that secretary blinkin did not address
when he was asked several times earlier
today at this G7 foreign Minister's
meeting in Italy but he said and that's
something that he has stressed that the
US was not involved in any offensive
what US officials have been saying is
that the targets were not nuclear H that
this was as tya just said also a scope
not a really big attack but of course
we're getting far more information from
us officials and what we get from the
administration we're still waiting to
hear from the Pentagon also to see if
there more briefings from the state
department to give more information on
and what the US position is on the
strikes in considering this muted
response that we are getting from Israel
about events overnight what does that
tell us about the sort of pressure that
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is under right now
domestically in the wake of the attack
from Iran last
weekend well I think there was a lot of
pressure uh on the war cabinet to react
and we've heard it even before that
Counterattack by Iran last weekend took
place that uh Israel had said any direct
attack from Israel on uh from Iran on uh
uh Israeli soil would be uh met with a a
response from Israel so this was also
then debated of course over the week in
the war cabinet and there was a lot of
pressure especially by the farri uh
cabinet members but also by you know the
right-wing cabinet members of the
security cabinet and the war cabinet um
to to respond uh and to respond
decisively as well but also a lot of
pressure from uh Israel's allies first
and foremost United States but also
other Western leaders to uh respond
cautiously as not to drag the country
into uh a wider conflict and I think
it's also interesting that there were
some polls out from uh you know about
the uh Israeli public here saying that
they were also concerned kind of split
in the middle uh how Israel should
respond but also over 74% in one of the
polls of the Hebrew University saying uh
that they do not want basically uh a
Posen attack that might undermine
Israel's security Alliance you know to
keep this momentum of support
international support in light of this
attack but also you have to see that U
many here are woke up at that time you
know to a new reality a a kind of new
order here because that was a a direct
confrontation coming out of a shadow war
that was always between Iran and Israel
and right now of course because at this
point in time we don't know what will
happen next I mean there are maybe signs
for deescalation but it could also go
the other way what about the proxies and
also the war of course between Israel
and Hamas in Gaza is also ongoing and
Benjamin that's what the Biden
Administration wants right um whatever
happens they want deescalation to be the
word that's right and not just words but
also actions and now that we have an
upcoming vote on the House of
Representatives on the Security
Supplemental for Ukraine for Israel and
for Taiwan many are pressing on the
Biden Administration to do more to do
more headlines and also to talk to both
of them to say that a deescalation is
needed right now all right Benjamin
Alvarez guber in Washington Tanya Kramer
in Jerusalem to both of you thank
you well now I want to bring in Ali fat
NAD he's a political scientist and
director of the center for Middle East
and Global Order right here in Berlin Mr
Nan it's good to have you with us so as
we heard there from our correspondent
you know we still haven't gotten
official confirmation from Israel that
it was behind this attack let me just
get your opinion what's your read was
this an obvious Israeli
attack well I mean there is little
probability that uh you know those
attacks were carried out by any other
state so there's a higher likelihood
uh and also we have some reports citing
us officials uh that are quite clear
that Israel has been carry carrying out
the strike there has been International
worry that an Israeli retaliation for
last weekend's attack would definitely
escalate this conflict and then the
counter response coming from Iran would
make it even more of a bigger crisis but
that hasn't happened how do you explain
this this muted response on both
sides well I think at this point in in
time no one has an interest um uh you
know to U provoke an allout War um this
is certainly true for the Iranian side
uh given also the nature of last
weekend's attack on Israel uh you know
the kinds of weapon systems that the
Iranians have used and also what has
happened um you know today or last night
um is also in my view an indication um
that uh uh Israel did not uh choose uh a
fashion of attack that could provoke
Iran to uh further escalate and what
instead seems to have been the case um I
mean of course by now we don't have any
confirmation about the exact nature of
the attack and also the targets and also
the damages uh but it seems seems that
this was a demonstration of power from
the uh Israeli side uh a signal sent to
Iran that you know Israel can cross
Iranian uh defenses uh perhaps at will
and this has been a demonstration of
power from the Israeli side uh signaling
that uh if need be uh you know Israel
could easily uh Target Iran in a
forceful forceful way and espe of course
Iranian um military infrastructure the
Iranian media been reporting that drones
were shot down near the Iranian city of
Isfahan what would make this city um a a
Target I mean um you know near esfahan
there are a lot of military um you know
uh complexes but also nuclear facilities
uh but um talking of the Irani reaction
it's quite uh visible uh that the
Iranians have no uh you know appetite
for escalation uh they've been
downplaying uh this attack uh to a uh
quite ridiculous level uh in terms of
saying that you know only three drones
were you know uh shot and were
intercepted by the Iranian side and from
uh all we can gather so far this attack
has been you know uh much more than that
but the Irani side is uh trying to uh
you know keep keep it low to downplay it
if not to belittle it uh that is also to
not to have the pressure to respond uh
which is again in contradiction to what
the Iranian side via the head of the IC
the Islam Revolution guard had announced
uh you know just following uh the
Iranian attack on Israel as a new
equation from the Iranian side which
would uh uh you know which would suggest
that any um uh attack from the uh
Israeli side on Iranian assets would be
met uh with a with with a response from
inside Iranian territory so uh given the
fact that this new equation doesn't seem
to hold uh this signals that uh those
have been you know warnings rather than
a change of uh strategy and the Iranian
side is still very much worried that an
allout War could you know uh uh could
evolve out of those tensions and uh in
such a scenario this would also be very
much
destabilizing for the regime in Iran do
you think the regime in Iran has is
realizing that maybe it's misread or
miscalculated uh the position of other
Gulf States and that maybe they were
counting on full support in a conflict
against Israel and that is obviously not
what they're
getting uh I don't think so that this
was part of the Iranian calculation that
um you know they're going to be
supported by the uh Gulf Arab Gulf
States um you know against Israel but
the position of the Arab Gulf States is
quite clear they're very much interested
uh you know in bringing about a
deescalation because stability for them
is vital uh politically but also
economically and so they fear any kind
of escalation in the region uh
especially involving Iran um they've
seen that Iran could be uh you know very
damaging to their nuclear uh sorry to
their economic viability to the kinds of
attacks that we've seen in the Persian
Gulf region against the UAE but also
against the main oil facility uh of
Saudi Arabia in September 2019 so uh you
know at least since then uh they're
extremely worried uh about destabilizing
activities of Iran uh and um given their
understanding of uh relative reduction
of us support they've chosen the way to
seek accommodation with Iran but
currently of course they do whatever
they can uh toward
deescalation Ali hatah NAD director of
the center for Middle Eastern Global
Order we appreciate your time on this
Friday evening thank you I asked DW's uh
Jerusalem correspondent Rebecca rites
whether there has been any confirmation
that Israel was behind this attack no
we've had no official uh confirmation we
have reached out to the Israeli military
they haven't confirmed to us or to
anybody whether or not they were indeed
the perpetrators of yesterday's
retaliatory or this morning I should say
is retaliatory attack uh that is
something I wanted to preface going into
this in that pretty much everything that
we know and the picture that is becoming
clearer as this day progresses we know
from unnamed sources what I can tell you
is that some us officials have confirmed
to the mainly Us Media that Israel did
carry out this strike that's been backed
up by unnamed Israeli officials that
told the Washington Post that Israel
carried out this attack uh that it was a
message to Iran we know uh that the air
defense system in that Isfahan area in
Iran was triggered and was and went off
and we've seen that video circulating of
what certainly looks like interceptions
but that's pretty much what we know so
far as I mentioned Israel still yet to
comment and it's likely that that isn't
going to change it certainly seems that
Israel that
this is indeed an attack from Israel
that not commenting is part of the
strategy they most often don't comment
on these types of military strategies
but particularly with this one it
appears or at Le analysts are saying it
could be part of the plan that Israel
wanted to Counterattack that they said
that they had no choice but to
Counterattack but they didn't want to
perhaps humiliate Iran or force them to
now to retaliate again uh that is
certainly the pressure that they were
put under by the International Community
particularly the west Western allies the
US Germany the UK EU uh to really kind
of try to deescalate this situation and
that appears to be the situation that
we're looking at uh we've heard from a
senior Iranian official telling the
Reuters news agency that Iran has no
immediate plan to retaliate so for now
uh you know certainly it's hopeful in
the region and across the world really
that this is not looking that it's going
to escalate for the moment uh though
this region remains very hot and nothing
can be guaranteed here in this volatile
area Rebecca Isfahan in Iran is home to
sites that are associated with the
country's nuclear site uh would that
make it a potential Target you
think it's very difficult to say
certainly probably uh you know we know
that Isfahan does have a large Airbase
we know that it has a major missile
production complex and as you've
mentioned as in that report several
nuclear sites now we have had
confirmation that none of the nuclear
sites were hit or damaged the atomic
energy agency confirming what we were
hearing from Iranian State TV on that uh
it was more likely that it was that
military base or a military base in the
area that was the Target and that could
suggest that it was a tit fortat uh
attack because it was in fact a military
base or an army uh a military base in
Israel that was struck by one of the
missiles that came in Iran's Tory attack
on Saturday so you know we could take
take that from from from that that it is
a tit fortat attack but certainly none
of those nuclear facilities being
damaged in this attack Rebecca R is
there reporting from Jerusalem thank you
very much
Rebecca for more of this let's uh get in
military expert Marina Manan from Kings
College London Marina there is no
official confirmation yet that Israel is
indeed behind this attack what do you
think
good afternoon Gard well if we look at
the world news and specifically the US
News um a lot of us officials have said
that Israel might be behind the attack
and that um the Israel authorities had
informed the United States last minute
that they would launch this attack um so
given the
targets given the timing today is the
85th birthday of Ayatollah h
it would seem like um it could have come
from Israel it is very
symbolic now what do you make of the
scale of this attack it's quite moderate
isn't
it it is very interesting if we compare
it to the Iranian attack last uh
Saturday evening Sunday Sun Sunday
morning it seems like both countries are
in a deescalation spiral so um Iran made
sure to launch an attack that wouldn't
give Israel enough pretext to counter
attack or at least to launch a very
serious attack that could potentially
damage Iranian nuclear program or its
air bases now the Israeli attack uh is
trumping that essentially robbing Iran
of a good strategic choice so it is
interesting that both countries feel the
need to respond but to respond in such a
way that it avoids a broader war against
both
countries now Iran says that they
intercepted several drones what do you
know about Iran's defense
capabilities well uh last year no this
year actually um in February there were
two new air defense systems um
introduced one is Aman which is a medium
um Range high altitude for ballistic
missiles and uh the zash which is a um
low altitude AA defense system and these
have been upgraded especially the later
one um they're very mobile they're
working
360 so these are the official
statements by the Iranian defense
Ministry we don't know how well they
work and apparently um one of the
systems the Amon one is also capable of
shooting down drones um and these have
been presented essentially because of
the growing tension with Israel so we
have the the specifications on paper of
these two air defense systems how well
they work we we don't know it remains to
be seen but apparently they have been
working on these flying objects which um
some believe to be quad copur launched
inside Iran have been shot down by
Interceptor missiles so we cannot say
that Iran doesn't have any air defense
capability certainly given the
circumstances and given the sanctions
they are working on their air defenses
understanding how crucial it is possibly
getting some input from their allies
such as Russia now let's have a look at
the Target uh region why would Isfahan
be targeted does that send a message in
itself yes it is very symbolic in itself
indeed on the one hand we have the um
uranium enrichment facility there and on
the other hand there is also an air base
there which FS the very very old still
USM made F14 tomat aircraft uh purchased
before the Iranian Revolution in
1979 so it would seem like it is a hint
uh presumably by Israel to say we can
reach you too and we know where your
nuclear facilities are there is no
damage to either one but even
considering the fact that the Israeli
intelligence knows where those bases are
located and has a cap ability to reach
them um not asan to say stay away from
attacking us because the next attack
could potentially be much more serious
in the sense that one of those two
objects could be damaged or destroyed if
not to all
together the Pense analyst Marina Miron
there for us thank you very much Marina
let's now bring in bam Ben talbl he's a
security Analyst at the foundation for
defense of democracies uh in Washington
and joins us from there now if Israel is
indeed behind this attack would it be a
rather restrained or a forceful
act pleasure to be with you great to be
back again uh in essence there may be a
trend line here that Israel is
connecting because if what is reported
uh is true Israel has used smaller
quadopter drones which many are alleging
was involved in this attack near Isfahan
both in 2022 in a drone storage facility
in kmana in Western Iran as well as in
2023 January if I'm not mistaken near a
missile production facility uh around
the city of Isfahan uh by that trend
line alone it would look like a likely
foreign culprit would be Israel but once
you layer in the fact that even prior to
the missile and drone barrage Israel uh
sustained but largely intercepted uh on
April 13 and 14 the Israelis had
promised to strike Iranian soil if
Israeli soil was struck so this is in my
view most certainly a retaliation but a
contrasting retaliation whereas the
Iranians launched uh a volley of almost
300 projectiles including land attack
cruise missiles ballistic missiles and
one-way attack drones uh causing very
little damage uh if indeed this is the
Israelis and all signs May point to that
despite the lack of official
confirmation from within Jerusalem uh
there is a sharp contrast as to a
limited scale uh perhaps a more precise
or effective military strike so is this
attack then designed to not provoke any
further uh reaction by Tran
indeed as much as I think the strike
might be aimed at resetting deterrence
given that this is more in line with
previous methods of the Israeli Iran
Shadow War previous you could say rules
of the game that were established
through behaviors uh in the four plus
Decades of the Israel Iran Shadow War
this is also designed to Tamp down
incentives to escalate you've already
seen Iranian State media uh hyping up
the fact that isan feels normal uh this
morning uh despite the the firing of the
air defense uh air defense assets
earlier in the morning around 56 a.m.
tan time 56 a.m. Iran time if I'm not
mistaken uh so they have an incentive to
slide down the escalation ladder while
that may put an end potentially in the
short term the tit fortat directly
between Iran and Israel on their
territories I don't think at all ends
both their strategic and ideational
competition as well as the Islamic
Republic state of D of death Israel
because after all uh it is still
supporting a multif front War uh against
Israel which is now still fighting Hamas
the lowest of lwh hanging fruit in
Iran's Terror network uh in Gaza now do
you think we will see any further
actions uh by Iran or have they sort of
said what they wanted to
say the Israelis may have been also
seeking to test the new or change stated
Doctrine uh as annunciated by Islamic
revolutionary guard Corps Commander
Hussein salami after their missile
barrage against Israel where he said if
Iran or an Iranian interest is struck be
it inside the country or outside we
reserve the right to respond overtly and
kinetically I'm paraphrasing uh but from
Iranian soil so this could be aimed to
test that Doctrine because as you know
there were also explosions reported but
on confirmed in Iraq and in Syria as
well those are places where Iran has
lots of Shia militia assets as well as
weapon storage facilities so it could be
designed to get Iran to uh test that
Doctrine as well rather than just
deescalate in safe face bamal there
foundation for the defense of
democracies thank you very much and we
can cross over now to the journalist
Christen hellberg she's an expert on the
Middle East uh christen this drone
attack on Isfahan do you think this
actually is Israel's
retaliation well we still don't have a
100% clear picture but it seems that
Israel opted for something that H it has
allegedly done before War which is a
covered drone attack by the mosad from
either inside Iranian territory or from
one of the neighboring countries which
could be the Kurdish region in Iraq or
the Republic of aaban and Israel has
done this allegedly before there were
several such attacks in 2022 in
2023 so if this is the case then Israel
pretty much followed the old rules of
the game I would say instead of taking
the conflict to a higher level
and this would be a rather symbolic
answer I would argue with a clear
message saying that we can hit Iran
anytime anywhere even without having to
fall back on a larger direct strike now
what do you expect to happen uh next
another tit fortat response by Iran
against Israel is this going to go
on I think we are seeing a limited but a
very well calibrated tiit for Tad you
know we had the direct attack on Israeli
territory so Israel had to fight back
and hitting Iranian territory directly
this is pretty much the equation that
Iranian officials were talking about
last week but if this is it if there's
nothing more to follow from the Israeli
side then then I think that nobody is
aiming at a further escalation at this
moment because this attack definitely
leaves the Iranian regime with the
option to not retaliate because they
don't feel compelled to react to this
and the fact that the Iranian regime
offici offals and the Iranian TV as we
just saw are kind of down downplaying
the whole attack points in this
direction we had the senior official
saying that there's no plan for an
immediate retaliation so for now it
doesn't seem um that we are heading to a
further escalation at this point will
this have an effect uh on the war in
Gaza you
think well I think there is one real
danger here that in return for this
moderate rea towards Iran the Israeli
government could now demand a free hand
in Gaza and it could stick to its
planned offensive in Rafa which is
something that US the US does not want
to see and we have heard that there were
talks yesterday between us officials and
Israeli officials discussing these plans
in Rafa and to prevent this which is
something that Washington wants to do I
think that the US allies and other
Western allies for example Germany
should increase the pressure on the war
cabinet cabinet on nany by for example
withholding weapons of war at the moment
to Israel until further notice and I'm
not talking about air defense systems
that obviously Israel needs to defend
itself against Iranian aggression I'm
talking about for example munition that
would be used in Gaza in a war that
according to un bodies human rights
organization international law experts
does not comply with the rules of the
international humanitarian law so I
think at this point to avoid a further
um offensive in Gaza uh the US and for
example the German government should
make their support somehow conditional
it has worked out concerning the
humanitarian Aid that is being brought
in all a larger scale and it should um
it should be used this kind of pressure
and this conditionalizing of support for
the Israeli government should be used as
well now to prevent an escalation and to
prevent this offensive in ra which would
be a catastrophe for the people within
Gaza the journalist Chris her there
thank you very much